ELBOing the GP away, how computational statistics can help change modern medicine. 
Mr Future pondered. “I cannot believe that the diagnosis of illness consisted of a doctor trying to identify symptoms which are common to any number of illnesses. Given all the emphasis on the individual in your society, how on earth could you think that the same treatment for everyone with that illness would work’’? Mrs Present looked sheepish and turned immediately to Mr Past. “How could you possibly conduct surgeries without washing either your hands or the equipment between patients’’? Mr Past shrugged his shoulders, “Joseph Lister was motivated to discover bacteria by observing the failings of those surgeons who ignored basic hygiene. He stood on the shoulders of those before him by using their inventions, such as the microscope, to improve his understanding.” Mrs Present laughed, turned to Mr Future and said, “our situation is just a less dramatic version of this”. 
Within each human cell, the DNA molecule is woven into 23 pairs of thread like structures called chromosomes which contain the instructions for life in discrete blocks. Sections of these blocks called genes are used to build RNA, RNA is used to build amino acids which group together to form proteins, the molecules which perform most of the functions in our body. In complex diseases such as cancer, mutations or “glitches” over multiple genes combine with the biological process of protein production and the environmental factors such as smoking and diet to increase the chance of triggering the disease. How the environmental factors and the biological process interact cannot be determined exactly. To complicate matters further, each person will have different exposures to a wide variety of factors, their exposure time and biological reaction will vary. Rarely will we know all of the risk factors or have the information available. 
Linear regression is a statistical technique used to determine the potential genes responsible for a complex disease. It requires data on the disease in question for each individual, called the response, and the sequenced DNA. This approach is mathematically convenient, but it skips a huge number of biological steps. The DNA does not directly cause the disease, it incorrectly instructs the protein production mechanism. The best way to determine the responsible genes is to compare them with parts of the different biological stages which we know are misfiring. 
Improvements in omics data collection mean data on the different stages of pre and post protein production is now available, but the mathematical calculations are challenging. The response for an individual is no longer a single number but a large collection of data points closely related to each other. This problem takes more time to solve, as each additional data point in the response requires an additional search through the DNA. This is made more difficult by extra calculations for the relationships between the data in the new response, but this nuisance is offset by the statistical help this provides in finding the responsible genes and the biological insight we know it brings. Whenever we analyse a biological system, we want to keep the relationships between the objects. For example, the brain is not merely characterised by the individual neurons, the interconnection between the neurons is just as important.  
My research will produce computer software which uses the relationships in the sequenced portion of the malfunctioning biological process to help determine the genes responsible for the complex disease. Diagnosis can then be performed by sequencing the DNA of the patient and identifying the presence of these genes. This uses a computer science technique called Variational Inference which approximates the exact solution by choosing inputs which return the largest value for an equation called the ELBO.  This approximation means you lose a small amount of accuracy relative to the perfect approach, but in return your calculations are much quicker for the computer to perform. 
The same technique can then be extended to finding groups of people with the same complex illness that have similar protein production profiles associated with the same mutations in their DNA.  These clusters allow us to recognise the differences in the biology of the individual and the environment and lifestyle they experience with a crucial feature. We avoid having to complete the impossible exercise of discovering all the risk factors and collecting data on each of them. Data patterns can be thought as “genetic signatures”, unique identifiers classifying the different ways the mutations create the same disease. This offers the chance to experiment with different treatments for different genetic signatures, creating the potential for personalised healthcare, tailored according to the how the genetic mutations impact the individual’s biological system.   
Mrs Present looked at Mr Future “Is this going to be one of those inventions?” Mr Future laughed “You will have to wait and see.”
